Let's talk about performance of your
code in Python. So you can take a break
from writing code in this video. Rather,
sit back and relax while I demonstrate
why I write all this code in outliers.py.
If we ignore all the test data
on lines 1 to 11, there's still a lot more
code in here, compared to our three line
loops from the last two videos.
So don't worry about typing along.
This code will be
available in the resources section for
this video, if you want to run it
yourself, but don't worry about how it
works at this time. It all makes sense
in due course. If you want to use the code
from the resources to put on your
computer, make sure you watch the entire
video first, before doing so. Alright, so I'm
going to quickly create the new file
that this code is going to be in and
paste it directly in. So it's New, Python
file - we're gonna be calling this
one timing_delete. I'll
paste the code in, and go back up to the
top of the file. Alright, so you can see I've
created a new python file - timing_delete
timing_delete - and pasted in the code.
You'll learn about that import statement
on line 1 later. We'll also be looking
at how to use the timeit module, in a
later section. Below that, though, on
lines 7 through 9,
I create three lists, to remove items
from. We need a separate list for each
method, because the code strips values
from the lists. Obviously, it wouldn't be
a valid test, unless we used the same list
to test each approach. The second and
third lists of this scenario would
already have the outlying values
stripped out, which we don't want.
We wrote our code so that it works with
very large lists, but to date, we've only really
tested it with small ones. On lines
7 to 8, I've used the list
function to create a list from a range.
At the moment, the range will go up to
100, and you can see that set on line 3.
The comment probably gives away what
I'll do next - we increase the list to
contain 100 million items.
We'll strip out values is less than 10,
and greater than 97. With the
large list, the max_valid value will also
increase, as the comment on line five shows.
Alright, so below that I've created a
function, using each of the approaches
that we've seen. The first one starts on
line 12. It uses the long method with two
loops there - you can see there's two for loops.
If you compare that code to outliers.py -
we'll quickly go over there - you can see it's
just about the same there. It doesn't
print anything, but the code's pretty much
the same otherwise. So moving on down,
lines 34 to 38 - that's the code that used
reversed to iterate backwards over the
list. That's the code we wrote in the
last video. I said that was slightly more
efficient than using a range, and that's
the code on lines 41 through 44. I've
included that as well, so that we
can see if what I said was correct. Below
that, moving on down, line 47, we've
got this weird test; if underscore underscore name,
etc. That's something else
we'll be learning about later. It's needed
because of the way we use the timeit
function but don't worry about it now. I
also don't want you to worry about all
that commented out code, that you can see
our lines 48 through 63. That's what
will be timing our three functions, so
we can see how efficient they are.
It's commented out at the moment because the
first thing we should do is test that
the functions work. So on lines 65 through 70, I
call each of the functions and pass the
list of numbers to it. We print out the
list, after they've had their items
removed, so we can check that they work. So let's do that first. I'm gonna run the program,
and you can see there, we've got the same
output from each function call -
exactly the same.
Alright, so now we can time them. So
what I'm going to do is uncomment
that test code. Basically, the code, lines 47 through 63 - uncomment. I'm also going to comment
out this code on lines 65 through 70. Alright, so let's see how each of our approaches performs.
So I'm going to run the program.
That's quite a difference with the first
timing. Don't worry about the exact
numbers because they'll change each time
you run the program, and will also be
very different on different hardware.
If you run this code, you'll certainly get
different numbers to what you see on
screen. What's important here, is how the
three values relate to each other.
So here the first method, which is the
complicated code using two loops, is
faster than the other two. All three
still execute in less than a millisecond -
much less - but our list only contains 100
items. Before we increase the size of the
lists, compare the last two values. I said
that using enumerate is more efficient,
but that function might be slower than
the other one. I did say it would be more
efficient, once the lists had more than
about a thousand items. So I'm going to
go and increase the list sizes, and try
again. I'll add two zeros. So we've now
got 10,000 items for our max value, and max
valid, instead of being 97, we're going to
add two nines, to make it 9997. So
our list now contains 10,000 items and the
max_valid value is 9997. Let's run the program again.
Now the second method is a
lot faster than the third. The difference
is still less than a millisecond, but
enumerate is proving to be more
efficient with larger lists. Our first
approach, the more complicated one, is
significantly faster than the other two -
orders of magnitude faster. Alright, time
to go really big. Before I do that,
though, I want to comment out the third
method. It's the slowest of the three and we're
really interested in how much more
efficient our complicated code is. I
don't want you to spend a long time
watching this video, waiting for our code to finish,
which is why I'm only going to test the
first and second approaches.
And we also need to comment out the code down here,
lines 59 through 63. Alright, so I'm gonna run the
program again now, just to make sure that
I've commented out the right code. As you
can see, there's still quite a difference
between our long code and the most
efficient of the shorter ones. Let's now
try 100 million items in the list. I'm
gonna change this now, to use the
commented values, commented out values.
Let's run this and see how long it takes.
There'll be a slight pause while the
lists are being created. When the text
timing appears, which it has now on the
output, the first timing result appears -
pretty soon after, you saw that. Our longer
code takes less than one second to execute.
The second function's still running. When it finishes you can see there,
we've got a huge difference - close
to nine seconds longer. Now most of that
time is spent while Python shuffles the
items down in the list. Our long code
only removes items from the list twice,
so there's far less work to do.
The shorter code deletes the items one
by one. Every time something's deleted,
the list has to be shuffled down and
that takes time. When the list gets large,
that time becomes very significant, as
we've just seen.
Alright, so let's finish the video
here. In the next video, we've got a bit
of a summary of what's happened so far.
See you in the next video.